 Deadlock. Deadlock is what? If two and more processes are waiting on happening of some event, but that event doesn't happen.  That is called the deadlock. And those two processes are in the deadlock state. Means, अगर एक simple से example से समझा जाए,  तो let's say कि I want to open an account in a bank. मैं bank में गया और bank personal से बोल रहा हूँ कि I want to open an account.  But that person is saying कि first you have to deposit this minimum amount, then we will open the account.  open the account, but मैं क्या बोल रहा हूँ कि पहले मैं account open करवाओंगा, after that if I want, I can submit the money,  but that is what a deadlock situation, क्योंकि मैं क्या बोल रहा हूँ कि definitely I will give the money,  but पहले account open करो, but bank personal क्या कह रहे हैं कि पहले आप money deposit करो हमारे पास,  then we will open the account, so both are waiting on happening of some event, but वो event occur नहीं होगा,  That is what the deadlock situation. Let's say with one more example, like there are two cars, A and B,  two drivers are driving that car, A is saying that I am on the right direction, he is moving towards this direction.  And at the same time some B person that is also moving towards A. So let's say that B is moving wrong side.  So it happens in India normally, that like I am as A, I am feeling that I am going in my direction,  में जा रहा हूँ, but B भी यही सोचना है  कि मेरी direction भी यही है, तो  इस situation में होगा क्या, both are  waiting for some event, event क्या है  A कह रहा है कि मेरे को इस direction  में जाना है, towards this direction  B saying मेरे को इस direction  में जाना है, but कैसे  जाएंगे, या तो A को  गाड़ी पीछे करनी पड़ेगी, और  बी को car पीछे करनी पड़ेगी  but क्यों करेंगे  ego भी कोई चीज है  so that's why neither A will remove the car  neither B will remove it  so that is what a kind of  deadlock situation  तो दोनों क्या है stuck हो गए  दोनों यहाँ पे stuck हो के रहे गए  this situation is known as deadlock situation  यहाँ हम technical way से बात करें  तो synchronization में  सिंक्रोनाइजेशन में भी हमने deadlock के बारे में बात किया था  जैसे दो semaphores है  S1 and S2  एक process है  उस process को दो semaphore चाहिए  S1 and S2  zoom it  and there is one more process  P2  उसको चाहिए S2 and S1  so let's say  कि P1 has taken the semaphore S  and waiting for S2  and P2 is having the semaphore S2 and waiting for S1  so that is what again are called a deadlock situation  because P1 got one semaphore S1 but S2 didn't get  why didn't S2 get?  maybe because of sleep, it may be pre-empted here  so P2 got S2 but as soon as S1 got it, it also got sleep  means again control is with P1  तो P1 S1 को लेके बैठा है और बोल रहा है कि मेरे को S2 चाहिए  P2 S2 को लेके बैठा है और बोल रहा है मेरे को S1 चाहिए  तो both are waiting on happening of some event  वो event happen क्या है कि P1 को S2 मिल जाए  P2 को S1 मिल जाए  but मिलेगा ही नहीं  because P1 ने S1 को down कर दिया  P2 ने S2 को down कर दिया  both are in the blocked state, अब इनको unblock कौन करेगा? कोई भी नहीं, that is called the deadlock situation.  अगर एक simple example से देखते हैं, like there is a resource, resource R1 and R2, two resources, two processes, P1 and P2.  let's say कि R1 is allocated to P1, this line is showing कि P1 has taken R1 and P1 is saying कि I need R2  because P1 is requesting for the R2 and R2 is held by P2, means R2 कौन लेके बैठा है? P2  and P2 is saying I need R1  so this situation is what?  this situation is a kind of deadlock  it is not exactly a deadlock  अभी इसको हम deadlock नहीं बोल सकते हैं  क्यों नहीं बोल सकते हैं अभी आपको clear हो जाएगा  यहाँ पे हम क्या बोल रहे हैं  कि P1 एक resource को लेके बैठा हुआ है  R1 को  P1 R1 को  use कर रहा है  but कह रहा है कि मैं execute तब होंगा, I will get execute if I get R2, P1 is saying I am having R2 but please give me R2, if you give R2 to me then I will get execute, but R2 is already taken by P2, R2 is already taken by P2, this is R2 is already taken by P2  और P2 is also saying I will get execute but just give me R1 because it is requesting for R  but नहीं मिलेगा, क्यों? क्योंकि P1 execute ही नहीं होगा  P1 execute कब होगा? जब उसको R2 मिल जाएगा  और वो R1 को लेके बैठा हुआ है लेकिन R2 जब उसको मिल जाएगा execute हो जाएगा  और P2 कब execute होगा? जब उसको R1 मिलेगा  लेकिन R1 उसको मिलेगा ही नहीं because R1 P1 लेके बैठा है  और P1 को R2 नहीं मिलेगा because R2 को P2 लेके hold करके बैठा हुआ है  तो means this is what a kind of deadlock situation  but इसको अभी deadlock नहीं बोल सकते  because deadlock के लिए there are four necessary conditions  the conditions are  mutual exclusion  no preemption  hold and wait  and  circular weight. These four are necessary conditions for the deadlock.  These four are necessary conditions. These four are necessary conditions for the deadlock.  What is the first condition? Mutual exclusion. Mutual exclusion means whatever resource you are using  in the scenario, whatever resource you are using, that resource must be used in a mutual exclusive way.  Means ऐसा नहों कि उस resource को एक से ज़्यादा process भी use कर सकते हैं एकी time पे  Like a printer  जैसे अगर एक process है वो printer को use कर रहा है  मतलब एक process printer को use करके print कर रहा है कुछ  और उसी time पे एक और process आ गया  तो P1 जो पहला process है वो preempt नहीं होगा  मतलब वो stop नहीं होगा वहाँ पे  ऐसा नहीं कि P2 भी अपना काम बीच में कर रहा है  मतलब P2 के page भी print हो रहे है  P1 process के page भी print हो रहे है  दोनों एक ही time पर print हो रहे है  no, this should not be there  मतलब यह necessary condition है  अगर इन में से चारों में से कोई भी condition true नहीं होती  तो there will be a chance कि deadlock कर ना हो  तो इसलिए what is the mutual exclusion  mutual exclusion is  कि whatever the resources you are using  all the resources must be used by  all the processes in a mutual exclusive manner  means one by one  interleaving is not allowed  interleaving is not allowed  second no preemption  no preemption means like  जैसे R1 को P1 लेके use कर रहा है  R1 is allocated to P1  and P1 is saying I need R2  and P2 is saying I need R1  तो preemption is not there  preemption means ऐसा नहों कि  like one process is holding some resource  और एक दूसर process आया  और हमने preempt कर दिया पहले वाले process को  कि अपने resources को release कर दो  no, preemption will not be there  मतलब यहाँ पर कोई priority वाला system नहीं है  कि high priority आया तो low priority वाला  हम यहाँ पर equal priority की बात कर रहे हैं  तो इसलिए preemption भी नहीं होगा  एक process जो hold करके बैठा है  वो hold ही करेगा  जब तक कि वो execute नहीं होता  वो preempt नहीं होगा  मतलब उसकी switching वहाँ पे नहीं होगी  third one is hold and wait  hold and wait is what?  this is a situation of hold and wait  hold and wait means  P1 is holding one resource that is R1  and waiting for R2  and P2 is holding one resource that is R2  and waiting for R1  this is the hold and wait  ऐसा नाओ कि P1 कह रहा है  कि मेरे को R2 चाहिए  and it released the R1  means जो वो hold करके बैठा था  वो उसने release कर दिया  no  whatever it is already holded  that must be with the P1  and it can request for more resources  तो यहनि एक resource यह दो resources  जितने भी P1 लेके बैठा है  it will hold them  and waiting for the another resources  जो उसके पास नहीं है  the fourth one is circular weight  circular weight means this is what  a kind of circle  circle this  this is what a kind of circle  circle means  like there is a loop in this  अगर यहाँ पे loop होगा  तो definitely यहाँ पे deadlock situation  occur हो सकती है  अभी भी मैं यही बोल रहा हूँ हो सकती है  because चारों conditions बहुत important है  इन चारों conditions के बाद ही मैं decide कर सकता हूँ कि deadlock है या नहीं  let's see one more example of circular weight  let's say कि there is a process P1 which is holding some resource R1  this arrow means अगर ये arrow towards the process आ रहा है  इसको हम बोलते है hold मतलब वो process उस resource को लेके बैठा हुआ है  means it is allocated  So R1 is allocated to P1 process and there is a process P2 which is saying I need R1, I need R1, need means I am requesting for R1, request के लिए हम उस resource के towards, resource की तरफ हम arrow draw करते हैं  and P2 is holding some resource R2, P2 R1 की request कर रहा है और R2 को hold करके बैठा है,  and let's say there is another process P3 which is requesting for R2 and it is holding R3,  Means R3 को hold किया हुआ है and requesting for R2  And P1 which is holding R1 it is requesting for a resource R3  It is requesting for a resource R3  So let's see कि यहाँ पे circular wait  Means this P3 is having R3 waiting for R2  P2 is having R2 waiting for R1  P1 is having R1 waiting for R3  so this is what a kind of circular weight  यहाँ पे एक loop आ गया  so these four conditions are necessary conditions  इनको हम बोलते necessary and sufficient conditions  to become a deadlock situation  तो अकेली एक situation नहीं  mutual exclusion, no preemption, hold and wait  circular weight अगर चारो necessary conditions है  then we can say deadlock occur हो रहा है  तो इसलिए ये चारों conditions जो हैं बहुत important हैं, this is a simple explanation of  कि what is a deadlock and what are the conditions of the deadlock. Thank you. 